README.md, before:

# react-three-babel

[![Version](https://img.shields.io/npm/v/@react-three/babel?style=flat&colorA=000000&colorB=000000)](https://www.npmjs.com/package/@react-three/babel)

A Babel plugin that automatically builds the `extend` catalogue of known native Three.js elements which enables granular usage of Three.js and therefore tree shaking. 

It is meant to be used with the new [`createRoot` API](https://docs.pmnd.rs/react-three-fiber/api/canvas#custom-canvas) added in v8 of `@react-three/fiber`, and **will NOT reduce bundle size if using the `Canvas` component ([Read more below](#limitations))!**

- [Install](#install)
- [Usage](#usage)
  - [Default](#default)
  - [Custom import sources](#custom-import-sources)
- [How it Works](#how-it-works)
- [Limitations](#limitations)

## Install

```bash
npm install --save-dev @react-three/babel
```

## Usage

### Default

```javascript babel.config.js
module.exports = {
  plugins: ["module:@react-three/babel"],
};
```

**In**

```jsx
import { createRoot } from "@react-three/fiber";

createRoot(canvasNode).render(
  <mesh>
    <boxGeometry />
    <meshStandardMaterial />
  </mesh>
);
```

**Out**

```jsx
import { createRoot, extend } from "@react-three/fiber";
import {
  Mesh as _Mesh,
  BoxGeometry as _BoxGeometry,
  MeshStandardMaterial as _MeshStandardMaterial,
} from "three";

extend({
  Mesh: _Mesh,
  BoxGeometry: _BoxGeometry,
  MeshStandardMaterial: _MeshStandardMaterial,
});

createRoot(canvasNode).render(
  <mesh>
    <boxGeometry />
    <meshStandardMaterial />
  </mesh>
);
```

### Custom import sources

```javascript babel.config.js
module.exports = {
  plugins: [
    [
      "module:@react-three/babel",
      {
        importSources: ["three", "three-stdlib"], // default: ["three"]
      },
    ],
  ],
};
```

**In**

```jsx
import { createRoot } from "@react-three/fiber";

createRoot(canvasNode).render(<orbitControls />);
```

**Out**

```jsx
import { createRoot, extend } from "@react-three/fiber";
import { OrbitControls as _OrbitControls } from "three-stdlib";

extend({ OrbitControls: _OrbitControls });

createRoot(canvasNode).render(<orbitControls />);
```

## How it Works

The plugin starts by looking at all the JSX elements that you include in your source
code files (ex. `<h1/>`, `<p/>`, `<ambientLight/>`, etc.). If any of them match an import
from the `three` namespace (or `importSources`, as shown in example above), then it is
added to a set.

Once all the JSX elements in a file are examined, the plugin adds the following imports to that file:

- Import `extend` function from `@react-three/fiber`
- For each name in the set, a named import from the `three` namespace (ex. `import { Mesh } from 'three'`)

Finally, it adds a call to `extend` with the named imports.

## Limitations

This plugin will currently only help reduce the bundle size of your application when using the [`createRoot` API](https://docs.pmnd.rs/react-three-fiber/api/canvas#custom-canvas) added in v8 of `@react-three/fiber`. If you are using the `<Canvas />` component instead, using this Babel plugin will not help reduce bundle size because the `<Canvas />` component automatically extends the entire Three.js component catalogue [here in the code](https://github.com/pmndrs/react-three-fiber/blob/f3d92751d1c22533f10879eb7fd6bb075c674c46/packages/fiber/src/web/Canvas.tsx#L65-L68).

This plugin relies on static analysis of JSX identifiers, which means that **if you wrap any elements or generate elements dynamically, they will not be picked up by this plugin**.

However, the `animated` elements from `@react-spring/three`, like `<animated.mesh />`, WILL be picked up by this plugin.

But something like this will not:

```jsx
const StyledMesh = styled('mesh')

<StyledMesh />
```

Commit message:

docs: add note about limits of three.js tree-shakability

README.md, after:

# react-three-babel

[![Version](https://img.shields.io/npm/v/@react-three/babel?style=flat&colorA=000000&colorB=000000)](https://www.npmjs.com/package/@react-three/babel)

A Babel plugin that automatically builds the `extend` catalogue of known native Three.js elements which enables granular usage of Three.js and therefore tree shaking. 

It is meant to be used with the new [`createRoot` API](https://docs.pmnd.rs/react-three-fiber/api/canvas#custom-canvas) added in v8 of `@react-three/fiber`, and **will NOT reduce bundle size if using the `Canvas` component ([Read more below](#limitations))!**

- [Install](#install)
- [Usage](#usage)
  - [Default](#default)
  - [Custom import sources](#custom-import-sources)
- [How it Works](#how-it-works)
- [Limitations](#limitations)

## Install

```bash
npm install --save-dev @react-three/babel
```

## Usage

### Default

```javascript babel.config.js
module.exports = {
  plugins: ["module:@react-three/babel"],
};
```

**In**

```jsx
import { createRoot } from "@react-three/fiber";

createRoot(canvasNode).render(
  <mesh>
    <boxGeometry />
    <meshStandardMaterial />
  </mesh>
);
```

**Out**

```jsx
import { createRoot, extend } from "@react-three/fiber";
import {
  Mesh as _Mesh,
  BoxGeometry as _BoxGeometry,
  MeshStandardMaterial as _MeshStandardMaterial,
} from "three";

extend({
  Mesh: _Mesh,
  BoxGeometry: _BoxGeometry,
  MeshStandardMaterial: _MeshStandardMaterial,
});

createRoot(canvasNode).render(
  <mesh>
    <boxGeometry />
    <meshStandardMaterial />
  </mesh>
);
```

### Custom import sources

```javascript babel.config.js
module.exports = {
  plugins: [
    [
      "module:@react-three/babel",
      {
        importSources: ["three", "three-stdlib"], // default: ["three"]
      },
    ],
  ],
};
```

**In**

```jsx
import { createRoot } from "@react-three/fiber";

createRoot(canvasNode).render(<orbitControls />);
```

**Out**

```jsx
import { createRoot, extend } from "@react-three/fiber";
import { OrbitControls as _OrbitControls } from "three-stdlib";

extend({ OrbitControls: _OrbitControls });

createRoot(canvasNode).render(<orbitControls />);
```

## How it Works

The plugin starts by looking at all the JSX elements that you include in your source
code files (ex. `<h1/>`, `<p/>`, `<ambientLight/>`, etc.). If any of them match an import
from the `three` namespace (or `importSources`, as shown in example above), then it is
added to a set.

Once all the JSX elements in a file are examined, the plugin adds the following imports to that file:

- Import `extend` function from `@react-three/fiber`
- For each name in the set, a named import from the `three` namespace (ex. `import { Mesh } from 'three'`)

Finally, it adds a call to `extend` with the named imports.

## Limitations

This plugin will currently only help reduce the bundle size of your application when using the [`createRoot` API](https://docs.pmnd.rs/react-three-fiber/api/canvas#custom-canvas) added in v8 of `@react-three/fiber`. If you are using the `<Canvas />` component instead, using this Babel plugin will not help reduce bundle size because the `<Canvas />` component automatically extends the entire Three.js component catalogue [here in the code](https://github.com/pmndrs/react-three-fiber/blob/f3d92751d1c22533f10879eb7fd6bb075c674c46/packages/fiber/src/web/Canvas.tsx#L65-L68).

This plugin doesn't do anything special when it comes to making your bundle size smaller. It will help reduce the size compared to extending the entire Three.js component catalogue (ex. using `extend(THREE)`). However, don't expect to get huge bundle size savings as there are some parts of Three.js that are not fully tree-shakable at the time of writing.

This plugin relies on static analysis of JSX identifiers, which means that **if you wrap any elements or generate elements dynamically, they will not be picked up by this plugin**.

However, the `animated` elements from `@react-spring/three`, like `<animated.mesh />`, WILL be picked up by this plugin.

But something like this will not:

```jsx
const StyledMesh = styled('mesh')

<StyledMesh />
```
